Update compact.md (#5620)
thanos-io/thanos: docs/components/compact.md

* If you accidentally upload blocks with the same external labels but produced by totally different Prometheis for totally different applications, some metrics can overlap and potentially merge together, making the series useless.
* If you merge disjoint series in multiple of blocks together, there is currently no easy way to split them back.
* The `penalty` offline deduplication algorithm has its own limitations. Even though it has been battle-tested for quite a long time, very few issues still come up from time to time (such as [breaking rate/irate](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/2890)). If you'd like to enable this deduplication algorithm, do so at your own risk and back up your data first!

#### Enabling Vertical Compaction

**NOTE:** See the ["risks" section](#vertical-compaction-risks) to understand the implications and experimental nature of this feature.

You can enable vertical compaction using the hidden flag `--compact.enable-vertical-compaction`

> If you want to "virtually" group blocks differently for deduplication use cases, use `--deduplication.replica-label=LABEL` to set one or more labels to be ignored during block loading.

Author: ok

> **NOTE:** If retention at each resolution is lower than minimum age for the successive downsampling pass, data will be deleted before downsampling can be completed. As a rule of thumb retention for each downsampling level should be the same, and should be greater than the maximum date range (10 days for 5m to 1h downsampling).

> Keep in mind that the initial goal of downsampling is not saving disk or object storage space. In fact, downsampling doesn't save you **any** space but instead, it adds 2 more blocks for each raw block which are only slightly smaller or relatively similar size to raw blocks. This is done by internal downsampling implementation which to be mathematically correct holds various aggregations. This means that downsampling can increase the size of your storage a bit (~3x), if you choose to store all resolutions (recommended and by default).

Reviewer: Suggestion:
```suggestion
Keep in mind that the initial goal of downsampling is not saving disk or object storage space. In fact, downsampling doesn't save you **any** space but instead, it adds 2 more blocks for each raw block which are only slightly smaller or relatively similar size to raw blocks. This is done by internal downsampling implementation which, to ensure mathematical correctness, holds various aggregations. This means that downsampling can increase the size of your storage a bit (~3x), if you choose to store all resolutions (recommended and enabled by default).
```

Ideally, you will have an equal retention set (or no retention at all) to all resolutions which allow both "zoom in" capabilities as well as performant long ranges queries. Since object storages are usually quite cheap, storage size might not matter that much, unless your goal with thanos is somewhat very specific and you know exactly what you're doing.

Not setting this flag, or setting it to `0d`, i.e. `--retention.resolution-X=0d`, will mean that samples at the `X` resolution level will be kept forever.

Please note that blocks are only deleted after they completely "fall off" of the specified retention policy. In other words, the "max time" of a block needs to be older than the amount of time you had specified.

## Deleting Aborted Partial Uploads

> It can happen that any producer started uploading some block, but never finished and never will. Sidecars will retry in case of failures during upload or process (unless there was no persistent storage), but a very common case is with Compactor. If the Compactor process crashes during upload of a compacted block, the whole compaction starts from scratch and a new block ID is created. This means that partial upload will never be retried.

Reviewer: Small suggestion:
```suggestion
It can happen that a producer started uploading some block, but it never finished and it never will. Sidecars will retry in case of failures during upload or process (unless there was no persistent storage), but a very common case is with Compactor. If the Compactor process crashes during upload of a compacted block, the whole compaction starts from scratch and a new block ID is created. This means that partial upload will never be retried.
```

> To handle this case there is `--delete-delay=48h` flag that starts deletion of directories inside object storage without `meta.json` only after a given time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To handle this case there is the `--delete-delay=48h` flag that starts deletion of directories inside object storage without `meta.json` only after a given time.
```

This value has to be smaller than upload duration and [consistency delay](#consistency-delay).

## Halting

> Because of the very specific nature of Compactor which is writing to object storage, potentially deleting sensitive data, and downloading GBs of data, by default we halt Compactor on certain data failures. This means that Compactor does not crash on halt errors, but instead is kept running and does nothing with metric `thanos_compact_halted` set to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the very specific nature of Compactor which is writing to object storage, potentially deleting sensitive data, and downloading GBs of data, by default we halt Compactor on certain data failures. This means that Compactor does not crash on halt errors, but instead keeps running and does nothing with metric `thanos_compact_halted` set to 1.
```

You need to multiply this with X where X is `--compact.concurrency` (by default 1).

> **NOTE:** Don't check heap memory only. Prometheus and Thanos's compaction leverages `mmap` heavily which is outside of `Go` `runtime` stats. Refer to process / OS memory used rather. On Linux/MacOS Go will also use as much as available, so utilization will be always near limit.

Reviewer: I feel like it's fine even without possesor as it was (or do it for both Prometheus and Thanos, but it still reads a bit weird to me)
```suggestion
**NOTE:** Don't check heap memory only. Prometheus and Thanos compaction leverages `mmap` heavily which is outside of `Go` `runtime` stats. Refer to process / OS memory used rather. On Linux/MacOS Go will also use as much as available, so utilization will be always near limit.
```

> Generally, a medium-sized bucket limit of 10GB of memory should be enough to keep it working.

Reviewer: I think this changes the meaning a bit, how about:
```suggestion
Generally, for a medium-sized bucket, limit of 10GB of memory should be enough to keep it working.
```

### Network

> Overall Compactor is the component that might have the heaviest use of the network against object storage, so place it near the bucket's zone/location.

Reviewer: Suggestion to make this sound a bit better IMHO.
```suggestion
Overall, Compactor is the component that possibly uses the most network bandwidth, so place it near the bucket's zone/location.
```

**NOTE:** Don't check heap memory only. Prometheus and Thanos compaction leverages `mmap` heavily which is outside of `Go` `runtime` stats. Refer to process / OS memory used rather. On Linux/MacOS Go will also use as much as available, so utilization will be always near limit.

> Generally, for a medium-sized bucket, limit of 10GB of memory should be enough to keep it working.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, for a medium-sized bucket, a limit of 10GB of memory should be enough to keep it working.
```

### Network

> Overall, Compactor is the component that possibly uses the most network bandwidth, so place it near the bucket's zone/location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Overall, Compactor is the component that can potentially use the highest amount of network bandwidth, so place it near the bucket's zone/location.
```
